<!--
####################################################################
#
# Copyright (c) 2016-2018, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC
# and other gtest-mpi-listener developers. See the COPYRIGHT file for
# details.
#
# SPDX-License-Identifier: (Apache-2.0 OR MIT)
#
####################################################################
-->

# googletest-mpi-listener

The goals of this project are:

- to augment the googletest framework with listener(s) that yield
sensible output for testing MPI-based, distributed-memory parallel
software

- to keep this software as low-maintenance as possible

- ideally, to merge some version of this functionality into [Google Test](https://github.com/google/googletest)

# License

This software is dual-licensed under the MIT and Apache 2.0 licenses,
and uses some example code from Google Test, which has the following
license that must be duplicated in its entirety, per its terms:

```
 Copyright 2005, Google Inc.  All rights reserved.

 Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
 modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
 met:

     * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
 notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
     * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above
 copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer
 in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
 distribution.
     * Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its
 contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
 this software without specific prior written permission.

 THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
 "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
 LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
 A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
 OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
 SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
 LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
 DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
 THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
 (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
 OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
```

The `MPIWrapperPrinter` class design was influenced by similar code in
[mxx](https://github.com/patflick/mxx), which is distributed under an
Apache 2.0 license.

# Requirements

- [CMake](https://cmake.org/)
- [Google Test](https://github.com/google/googletest)
- a standards-conforming MPI-1.x implementation
  (e.g.,
  [MPICH](http://www.mpich.org/),
  [Open MPI](https://www.open-mpi.org/),
  [MVAPICH](http://mvapich.cse.ohio-state.edu/),
  [Intel MPI](https://software.intel.com/en-us/intel-mpi-library))
- a C++ compiler; Google Test 1.8.1 and earlier require a
  C++98-standard-compliant compiler, whereas later versions require a
  C++11-standard-compliant compiler

# Building the example code/unit tests

1) Change to the `build` directory:

`pushd build`

2) Run CMake:

`cmake ..`

You should see some CMake output indicating compiler detection, etc.

3) Run the output file(s) generated by CMake. For example, assuming
the CMake generator used is "Unix Makefiles", run

`make`

to build the unit tests.

4) Run the unit tests:

`mpi-minimal-listener-unit-tests`
`mpi-wrapper-listener-unit-tests`

# Usage

Please read the
[Google Test Primer](https://github.com/google/googletest/blob/master/googletest/docs/Primer.md)
and
[Google Test Advanced Guide](https://github.com/google/googletest/blob/master/googletest/docs/AdvancedGuide.md)
for background before reading the remainder of this section.

Usage of these listeners is illustrated by the examples in
`test/mpi-minimal-listener-unit-tests.cpp` and
`test/mpi-wrapper-listener-unit-tests.cpp`, both of which include
some very simple-minded MPI unit tests that are used for basic
testing. To use this listener, you will need to write your own `int
main(int argc, char** argv)` function -- you cannot use the stock
`gtest_main` supplied with Google Test. Using a custom `main` function
enables us to:

- initialize MPI
- add an `Environment` object that will finalize MPI when `main`
  terminates
- remove the stock Google Test `TestEventListener`, which emits output on tests
- add a `TestEventListener` that will emit sensible output (that is,
  rank-ordered output to stdout) for MPI-based unit tests

all of which is necessary, and not possible using the stock
`gtest_main` function.

Directions for writing tests can be found in [Google Test
Primer](https://github.com/google/googletest/blob/master/googletest/docs/Primer.md)
and [Google Test Advanced
Guide](https://github.com/google/googletest/blob/master/googletest/docs/AdvancedGuide.md). The
design assumption in this library is that these tests will be executed
in distributed fashion using the MPI distributed-memory parallel
programming model (that is, a shared-nothing, process-local memory
address space). This assumption implies that tests will be run by all
MPI processes, or disabled on all processes. Conditionals can be used
to execute parts (or all) of the body of a test on a given MPI process
or set of processes.

After writing tests, your `int main(int argc, char** argv)` function
should look like the test runner in `test/mpi-wrapper-listener-unit-tests.cpp`:

```c++
int main(int argc, char** argv) {
  // Filter out Google Test arguments
  ::testing::InitGoogleTest(&argc, argv);

  // Initialize MPI
  MPI_Init(&argc, &argv);

  // Add object that will finalize MPI on exit; Google Test owns this pointer
  ::testing::AddGlobalTestEnvironment(new GTestMPIListener::MPIEnvironment);

  // Get the event listener list.
  ::testing::TestEventListeners& listeners =
      ::testing::UnitTest::GetInstance()->listeners();

  // Remove default listener: the default printer and the default XML printer
  ::testing::TestEventListener *l =
        listeners.Release(listeners.default_result_printer());

  // Adds MPI listener; Google Test owns this pointer
  listeners.Append(
      new GTestMPIListener::MPIWrapperPrinter(l,
                                              MPI_COMM_WORLD)
      );
  // Run tests, then clean up and exit. RUN_ALL_TESTS() returns 0 if all tests
  // pass and 1 if some test fails.
  int result = RUN_ALL_TESTS();

  return 0;  // Run tests, then clean up and exit
}
```

Comments in this example describe what each line does. The ordering is
also important, and should be preserved if you augment this example
with additional code.

Most users should probably use a `MPIWrapperPrinter` wrapped around
the default Google Test event listener, because this configuration
provides colorized pretty-printing and works correctly with Google
Test's XML and JSON output generators. Please note, however, that this
colorization will add console color code characters to the output,
which may be undesirable if parsing console output redirected to
files. Please also note that, due to the architecture of Google Test
and the use of Google Test's `ADD_FAILURE_AT` macro within
`MPIWrapperPrinter`, adding more than one instance of
`MPIWrapperPrinter` to the collection of active listeners is likely to
yield garbled output.

You could also use an alternative `int main(int argc, char** argv)`
for your test runner, taken from `test/mpi-minimal-listener-unit-tests.cpp`:

```c++
int main(int argc, char** argv) {
    // Filter out Google Test arguments
    ::testing::InitGoogleTest(&argc, argv);

    // Initialize MPI
    MPI_Init(&argc, &argv);

    // Add object that will finalize MPI on exit; Google Test owns this pointer
    ::testing::AddGlobalTestEnvironment(new MPIEnvironment);

    // Get the event listener list.
    ::testing::TestEventListeners& listeners =
    ::testing::UnitTest::GetInstance()->listeners();

    // Remove default listener
    delete listeners.Release(listeners.default_result_printer());

    // Adds MPI listener; Google Test owns this pointer
    listeners.Append(new MPIMinimalistPrinter);

    // Run tests, then clean up and exit. RUN_ALL_TESTS() returns 0 if all tests
    // pass and 1 if some test fails.
    int result = RUN_ALL_TESTS();

    return 0;
}
```

Output from `MPIminimalistPrinter` is not colorized, and does not work
well with JSON or XML output. Consider this listener if you need more
easily parseable output and you are willing to sacrifice pretty
printing and pretty XML or JSON unit test reports.

# Design considerations

The most important design consideration was to write something
portable, quickly. This meant using MPI-1.x calls (because
supercomputers sometimes run older MPI implementations), and relying
on the public API calls of a portable unit testing library that is
currently being maintained. As a result of these decisions:

- this software communicates unit test results to MPI process 0 and
  then writes them to standard out (because MPI I/O is defined in
  MPI-2)

- consequently, this software will have an output bottleneck at
  extreme scale, because the output is, to borrow from [Bill Gropp's
  MPI I/O slides (see slide
  3)](http://wgropp.cs.illinois.edu/courses/cs598-s16/lectures/lecture32.pdf),
  "worse than sequential"

- this software is header-only, to make vendoring it into software
  packages no more painful than vendoring in Google Test

The current setup should be usable for small numbers of MPI processes
-- I've tested it on 256 MPI processes and it seems to work fine. If
there is a need to write infrastructure for testing on 100,000 MPI
processes, then an MPI I/O-based `TestEventListener` makes more sense,
and would relax the output bottleneck. This new code should be written
in a second header to isolate MPI-2-conforming code from
MPI-1-conforming code. Although I haven't done it yet, I suspect this
modification could be done in days.

If you want to hack on this code, the most important things to note are:

- `::testing::TestEventListener::OnTestPartResult` is only called
  after assertion failures or invocation of the `SUCCESS()` macro, so
  it may not be called on some MPI processes, and there should be no
  communication in this function

- In `TestEventListener::OnTestEnd`, although `::testing::TestInfo`
  has methods to query `::testing::TestPartResult` objects within it,
  when I called those methods, the information I wanted (namely,
  `::testing::TestPartResult` objects) was no longer present, which is
  why I instead store that information within a class member instead

As stated above, I aim to keep this software low-maintenance, because
this package was written in a couple days in order to make the
parallel software development for my work easier. I'm happy to accept
bug-fixes, and I'm willing to discuss or consider feature
requests/additions, but I'd like any feature to be easy to maintain. I
do not get paid to write testing frameworks, which is why any
responses to bug-fixes, feature requests, documentation improvements,
or questions may be delayed; it is also why I want this software to be
low-maintenance. **In general, even though I intend to respond to
correspondence about this software (I would like it to improve), users
should assume I may not get back to them in a timely fashion, or at
all.**

# TODO

- Automate library testing instead of running tests manually. Using
  BATS to run executables and test captured console output is probably
  a reasonable solution. Captured console output could be compared to
  "known good" output, though it might be useful to shim in versions
  of the wrapper tester that can set the file name (and line number)
  to known, repeatable values.

*Release number:* LLNL-CODE-739313
